
Author’s Preface

The basis or springboard for this novel is my short story 
“The-Sliced-Crosswise-Only-On-Tuesday-World.” This took place in 
A.D. 2214 (old style) or N.E. 130 (new style): N.E. stands for New 
Era, and N.E. 130 indicates the one hundred and thirtieth year after 
the official beginning of the “stoner” society. The events of 
Dayworld occur in A.D. 3414 or N.E. 1330. Thirteen hundred and thirty 
years have passed since the start of the New Era, N.E. 1.

Though there are twelve hundred years between the events of the short 
story and the novel, only seven and a half generations 
(arithmetically speaking) have been born. The reason for this will 
become apparent during the course of the novel...

The protagonist of Dayworld is an outlaw, a daybreaker. He lives by 
the horizontal calendar.

For an explanation of the horizontal and vertical calendars, refer to 
the illustration on the next page.

The calendar is “vertical,” not our present-day “horizontal” 
calendar. Our calendars present the seven days of the week as if we 
moved through time horizontally. Sunday precedes Monday, and Monday 
precedes Tuesday, and by the time we have reached next Sunday, we 
have stepped off onto another horizontal chronological path.

The New Era or “stoner” society uses a “vertical” calendar.

Reason: One-seventh of the world’s population lives on only one day 
of the week. To put it another way, six-sevenths of the world’s 
population is in a “stoned” or “suspended-animation” state 
for six days of each week. Sunday’s people live on Sunday only; 
Monday’s, on Monday, and so forth.

At the end of one passage of Earth around the sun, a Sunday citizen 
has lived only fifty-two days. If born in, say, N.E. 100, that person 
has been on Earth two hundred years by N.E. 300. But that person is 
not quite twenty-nine years old in physiological development. If that 
person has been on Earth for six hundred years, he or she is not 
quite eighty-six years old in terms of aging.

The stoner culture greatly reduces the demand for food and goods, 
amount of pollution, and living space required. If the global 
population is, say, ten billion, then, on each day, only a little 
over one billion, four hundred and twenty-eight million, five hundred 
thousand people are eating food, drinking, using space, and adding 
trash, junk, and waste matter for disposal.

The New Era government decreed a new calendar for two reasons. One, 
it wanted to make a clean break with the past. Two, it made sure that 
each day’s population would not be cheated out of its full quota of 
days per year because of the different days of the months as set by 
the Gregorian calendar. The summer solstice, which occurs on or near 
June 21, arbitrarily became the first day of the year, and that day 
was designated as Sunday.

The year was divided into thirteen months of four seven-day weeks. 
The end of the year was followed by a zero or lost day to ensure that 
there were three hundred and sixty-five days in the year. During leap 
years, an extra zero or lost day was added. Everybody except a 
minimum number of firefighters, police, administrators, and so on was 
kept in the stoned state.

The citizens would, of course, refer to two different types of time. 
Objective time, that is, time as measured by the annual circling of 
the Earth around the sun and Earth’s spinning, would be termed 
obyears, obmonths, and obweeks. Subjective time, that is, the actual 
number of days, weeks, months, and years a person has lived, would be 
subdays, subweeks, submonths, and subyears.

The names of the months are, in order of succession, Unity, Variety, 
Joy, Hope, Comradeship, Love, Freedom, Plenty, Peace, Knowledge, 
Wisdom, Serenity, and Fulfillment. These are also the Thirteen 
Principles upon which the New Era society is supposedly based.

======================================================================
====

AARDVARK CONVERSATION

me: What year (in the New Era calendar) does the science fiction 
novel Dayworld, by Philip Jose Farmer, begin?

Terri B./33/F/Nashville,TN just responded to your question about 
**Philip Jose Farmer**:
"1330. The guy lived in Tuesday world, I believe."

me: 
Then the New Era calendar must have had a year 0, unlike our own, so
that there could be 1330 years before 1330 N.E. 1330 is a multiple of
7, so the vertical weekday cycle would come all the way around before
1330. That's why 1330 begins with D1W1. 1331 N.E. would begin with
D4W1, because the last three weeks of 1330 would be D1W8, D2W8, and
D3W8.

Thanks for helping me out! I left my book at home, and neither Amazon
nor Google had page images.

It's fun to apply the same parascholarship to Farmer that Farmer did
to Tarzan and Doc Savage. :)

I'm going to write a Perl script to tell me what the N.E. date
supposedly is. Email me if you want info: rwhe@ludism.org.

=================================

A.D. 2214 (old style) or N.E. 130

Friday-World
VARIETY, Second Month of the Year
D5-W1 (Day-Five, Week-One)

Saturday-World
VARIETY, Second Month of the Year
D5-W1 (Day-Five, Week-One)

"The summer solstice, which occurs on or near June 21, arbitrarily 
became the first day of the year, and that day was designated as 
Sunday."

Epoch = 21 June 2085 = Sunday, D1-W1 Unity, 1 NE

Is 21 June designated as de facto solstice (like 21 March as first 
day of the Baha'i calendar), or does determining the beginning of the 
year require determining the actual astronomical solstice?

The NE calendar is horizontally perpetual. 13 months plus one or two 
blank days make it fairly typical in that respect.


